Add blogpost about the Github billing dashboard (#100)
satellytes/satellytes.com: blog-posts/github-billing-dashboard.md

We use CI/CD pipelines and automatizations in every project we are responsible for. Especially Github Actions is becoming more popular, as it’s simple to use and growing in functionality. Over the last couple of months, we managed to create multiple projects and repositories that are using Github Actions extensively.

Github Actions provides a generous free tier, so costs for smaller projects are often nonexistent. Once you reach the free tier limits, every Action (and other services) needs to be "paid by use" at the end of the month. Github aggregates all costs and shows them in your settings. But Github doesn't provide charts or a dashboard to get into the details of the costs, for example for historical data.

This can be a problem if you have multiple projects, as it’s not obvious which service causes the costs. If you want to figure that out, you can get a CSV from Github, which is hard to read and analyze. We, therefore, decided to create a dashboard to visualize this CSV and show you the costs per repository and month.

![screenshot of the billing settings in a Github account](./images/screenshot-of-gh-billing-settings.png)

> This is all the billing information you get from the Github Settings. No historical data, no expense per service.

Reviewer: The image appears without preparing the reader. I think the description text should come before and then refer to the image with "as in the image below" or similar.

Author: Good point 👍  We have now written the description in front of the screenshot. We have also changed the screenshots themselves. In the screenshot, you can now see the menu bar of the browser, which should make the whole thing a bit clearer

Reviewer: Yeah much much better. Thank you.

![screenshot of the Github billing dashboard with some charts](./images/screenshot-of-gh-dashboard.png)

And this is what you get from the Github Billing Dashboard. Costs per service per month with historic data.

This blog post gives you some insights into how we build it.

## Technologies and Libraries

> The dashboard runs locally in the user's browser and thus does not send any data to external servers, even the most recently used files are stored only in the browser's local storage. The dashboard was mainly developed with React and Typescript. For the styling of the dashboard, we used styled-components. In addition, various libraries were used.

Reviewer: >  In addition, various libraries were used.

Well either remove the sentence or clarify at least which kind of libraries if you don't want to refer to all of them. Especially because you are explaining details about `papaparse` but you don't mention it here? Neither is `Recharts` mentioned. 

I get the sentence now, it's like telling "we have used some libraries, and we will explain the interesting ones. I would list and summarize them while being here to prepare the user for the following sections.

Author: We have now written the libraries into a clear list. Hopefully, it is now clear to the reader what is meant by this sentence.

Reviewer: Cool, that's how I imagined it. You could have linked the libraries here already too but the links in the details are enough. I'm probably only interested in the link when I'm reading the details anyway 👌

### papaparse

> [papaparse](https://github.com/mholt/PapaParse) is a CSV parser that converts CSV to JSON. Besides strings, papaparse can process CSV files directly, no matter if they are located locally on the computer or have to be accessed via an external URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[papaparse](https://github.com/mholt/PapaParse) is a in-browser CSV parser that converts CSV to JSON. Besides strings, papaparse can process CSV files directly, no matter if they are located locally on the computer or have to be accessed via an external URL.
```

Reviewer: That's probably clear from the context but I took that word from their description to clarify the context easily.

> [papaparse](https://github.com/mholt/PapaParse) is a CSV parser that converts CSV to JSON. Besides strings, papaparse can process CSV files directly, no matter if they are located locally on the computer or have to be accessed via an external URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[papaparse](https://github.com/mholt/PapaParse) is a CSV parser that converts CSV to JSON. Besides strings, papaparse can process CSV files directly, whether they are located locally on the computer or accessed via an external URL.
```

Reviewer: Have you changed the content manually? You are ware of the possibility to use "add suggestion to batch" to collect the proposals you want to accept and then merge them before starting your local other changes? I'm asking because it looks like you did it manually and you could save some time by embracing the feature the next time. I'm going to resolve this now because I have seen the changes. Thanks for accepting it.

Author: Yes, I did it manually. Thanks for the hint.

> The following example shows how easy the conversion of a CSV file is. The function parse() is called with a file like sample.csv. Additionally, it needs as a second input parameter a config object, in which certain options for the parsing can be set. For example, the headings of the individual values are camalized here. The parsing itself, the assignment of the values to the headings, and the transformation into the UsageReportCsvEntry type are completely handled by papaparse. The parsed object can still be modified. In the sample code, you can see how in addition to the existing CSV file headers "pricePerUnit" is calculated and added to the finished object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how easy the conversion of a CSV file is. The function parse() is called with a file like sample.csv. Additionally, it needs as a second input parameter a config object, in which certain options for the parsing can be set. For example, the headings of the individual values are camalized here. The parsing itself, the assignment of the values to the headings, and the transformation into the `UsageReportCsvEntry` type are completely handled by papaparse. The parsed object can still be modified. In the sample code, you can see how in addition to the existing CSV file headers `pricePerUnit` is calculated and added to the finished object.
```

Reviewer: backtick makes here sense, doesn't it ?

Author: > One other thing: Can you search for some other picture? The current one is from the example blog post.
> The keyword dashboard brings so many ideas. It only needs to be symbolic. Or we can ask verena for some photo collage where a stock photo is merged with a nice screenshot of the tool's output ?
> 
> * https://unsplash.com/photos/4VSsq9ErzOs
> * https://unsplash.com/photos/hpjSkU2UYSU (for a collage)
> * etc etc.
> 
> Don't forget the attribution data for photos in the frontmatter header though 🙏

I like the picture with the cockpit because it is definitely causally related to the project👌  We have additionally asked Verena, maybe she also has an idea. Until then I would use the cockpit image.

```
billing.csv

Date,Product,Repository Slug,Quantity,Unit Type,Price Per Unit,Actions Workflow,Notes
2021-06-14,actions,sample-repository1,21,UBUNTU,$0.008,.github/workflows/integration-test.yml,
2021-06-14,shared storage,sample-repository2,20.1028,gb,$0.25,,
2021-06-15,actions,sample-repository3,26,UBUNTU,$0.008,.github/workflows/main.yml,
2021-06-15,actions,sample-repository2,17,UBUNTU,$0.008,.github/workflows/integration-test.yml,
```

```tsx
export interface UsageReportCsvEntry {
	date: string;
	product: string;
	repositorySlug: string;
	quantity: string;
	unitType: string;
	pricePerUnit: string;
	actionsWorkflow: string;
	notes: string;
}

export interface UsageReportEntry extends UsageReportCsvEntry {
	totalPrice: number;
}

parse<UsageReportCsvEntry>(file, {
	header: true,
	skipEmptyLines: true,
	transformHeader: (header: string): string => {
		return camalize(header);
	},
	complete: (result) => {
			const githubBillingEntries: UsageReportEntry[] = result.data.map(
				(dailyEntry) => {
					return {
					...dailyEntry,

> 					totalPrice: *parseFloat*(dailyEntry.quantity) * *parseFloat*(dailyEntry.pricePerUnit),

Reviewer: Text tells this but I only see the `totalPrice` being calculated (which relies on `pricePerUnit`) ?

> In the sample code, you can see how in addition to the existing CSV file headers `pricePerUnit` is calculated and added to the finished object.

				};
			}
		);
	},
});
```

> ### Recharts

Reviewer: You linked papaparse but you don't link recharts. I would love to have the github link here to quickly check the sources/repo.

Reviewer: I have seen the fix👍

Probably the most obvious feature of the dashboard is the functionality to display the costs in charts. For this, we used the React library Recharts. This library comes with some handy features that were also important for this project. Besides the possibility to choose between different chart types (e.g. Bar or Line), Recharts also leaves a lot of room for customizing the charts. This includes, for example, various stylings, additional elements (e.g. tooltip, legend, ...), and the possibility to simply add features that are not available.

```tsx
<BarChart data={currentData} margin={{ bottom: 20 }}>
  <CartesianGrid vertical={false} stroke={"rgba(255, 255, 255, 0.1)"} />
  <XAxis
    dataKey={groupedBy === "daily" ? "day" : "week"}
    tick={{ fill: "white" }}
    axisLine={false}
    tickLine={false}
    minTickGap={10}
  />
  <YAxis
    domain={[0, maxValueOfYAxis]}
    unit=" $"
    tickCount={maxValueOfYAxis + 1}
    tick={{ fill: "white" }}
    axisLine={false}
    tickLine={false}
  />
</BarChart>
```

### date-fns

> For grouping costs by days, weeks and months we had to work a lot with dates. The library `date-fns` made this work easier for us because it brings important functions like `startOfMonth()`, `getISOWeek()`, or `lightFormat()`, which allows you to customize the date format easily. For example, we used the `lightFormat()` function to display the start or end date of the data set. Due to the detailed documentation, it was very pleasant to work with `date-fns`.

Reviewer: Did you even think about moment? Would be some nice context knowledge, why you decided for date-fns (size, functional approach etc?). Absolutely optional.

```tsx
isFirstMonth()
	? ` (from ${lightFormat(new Date(firstDayOfMonth), "dd.MM.")})`
	: ""
isLastMonth()
	? ` (till ${lightFormat(new Date(lastDayOfMonth), "dd.MM.")})`
	: ""
```

### react-medium-image-zoom

> React-medium-image-zoom is a small but very useful library to zoom in images that are clicked. This library also leaves many possibilities for customization, for example, the background of the zoomed image and the zoom effect can be customized very easily. For the basic function of react-medium-image-zoom it is sufficient to just wrap an image or div tag with the Zoom tag as shown in the example below. The customization features can be added via props.

Reviewer: That's a cool effect and easy to use 👍. A small video would help understanding what you mean with `zoom`.
We don't have a video player for local files though. So maybe a good feature to develop after the blog post is merged?

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1701755/125790084-03d3d72e-b6f3-42c7-8d72-1afb937b746c.mp4

Author: Nice idea 👍

```tsx
<Zoom>
	<img src="sample.jpg"/>
</Zoom>
```

### GitHub Pages deployment

> We chose GitHub Pages to host the page, as it's a simple and free hosting solution. It was important to us that new features are deployed automatically to GitHub Pages. To automate this process, we decided to use the Github Actions with [GitHub Pages Deploy Action](https://github.com/JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action).

Reviewer: Please check every `GitHub` word in this blog post. You mix `GitHub` and `Github`. The camel case one is the correct one.

Reviewer: Maybe you are not done yet just a note where the problems were:
![Screen Shot 2021-07-16 at 12 26 16](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1701755/125933973-4e48c71f-2579-464b-97c3-af3d987260c0.png)

Reviewer: it's fixed thank you

> This ensures that with every commit to a selected branch (in our case to `main`), the new version is automatically deployed to the `gh-pages` branch. Thereby all changes are immediately visible to the user and can be used directly in the finished product. By using this plugin we also didn't need to change any scripts or code we didn't already have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures that with every commit to a selected branch (in our case to `main`), the new version is automatically deployed to the `gh-pages` branch. Thereby all changes are immediately visible to the user and can be used directly. By using this plugin we also didn't need to change any scripts or code we didn't already have.
```

Reviewer: "finished product" sounds awkward

> So, if you have a React SPA you can just copy&past the GitHub Action and start deploying to GitHub pages. You only need to change the `PUBLIC_URL` variable to your GitHub Pages deployment URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, if you have a React SPA you can just copy & paste the GitHub Action and start deploying to GitHub pages. You only need to change the `PUBLIC_URL` variable to your GitHub Pages deployment URL:
```

```yaml
name: Deploy to gh-pages

on:
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:
  build-and-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout 🛎️
        uses: actions/checkout@v2.3.1

      - name: Install and Build 🔧
        run: |
          npm install
          npm run build
        env:
          PUBLIC_URL: /github-billing-dashboard

      - name: Deploy 🚀
        uses: JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@4.1.3
        with:
          branch: gh-pages
          folder: build

> ```

Reviewer: This is the end ? Please give me a conclusion 🌟

Author: Yes definitely true. We have now added a short summary

Reviewer: And I like it. Thanks!

This ensures that with every commit to a selected branch (in our case to `main`), the new version is automatically deployed to the `gh-pages` branch. Thereby all changes are immediately visible to the user and can be used directly. By using this plugin we also didn't need to change any scripts or code we didn't already have.

So, if you have a React SPA you can just copy & paste the GitHub Action and start deploying to GitHub pages. You only need to change the `PUBLIC_URL` variable to your GitHub Pages deployment URL:

```yaml
name: Deploy to gh-pages

on:
  push:
    branches: [main]

jobs:
  build-and-deploy:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout 🛎️
        uses: actions/checkout@v2.3.1

      - name: Install and Build 🔧
        run: |
          npm install
          npm run build
        env:
          PUBLIC_URL: /github-billing-dashboard

      - name: Deploy 🚀
        uses: JamesIves/github-pages-deploy-action@4.1.3
        with:
          branch: gh-pages
          folder: build
```

## Conclusion

> The CSV file from GitHub provides a lot of detailed information about the incurred costs but no graphical representation. The GitHub Billing Dashboard makes it possible to present this information in a meaningful and informative way to the user. The libraries discussed here have made the development of the dashboard much easier and have resulted in the project being a lot of fun for us.  Any feedback or new ideas on this project would be greatly appreciated.

Reviewer: you nailed it 🌟 Thank you

---
path: "/blog/github-billing-dashboard/"
date: "2021-07-15"
title: "GitHub CSV Billing Dashboard"

> featuredImage: images/gh-billing-dashboard-cockpit.jpg

Reviewer: yeah I like that image

author: "Felix Hofmann and Fabian Dietenberger"
authorSummary: "Working Student and Senior Developer at Satellytes"

> shortSummary: We use CI/CD pipelines and automatizations in every project we are responsible for. Especially GitHub Actions is becoming more popular, as it’s simple to use and growing in functionality. Over the last couple of months, we managed to create multiple projects and repositories that are using GitHub Actions extensively. GitHub Actions provides a generous free tier, so costs for smaller projects are often nonexistent. Once you reach the free tier limits, every Action (and other services) needs to be "paid by use" at the end of the month. GitHub aggregates all costs and shows them in your settings. But GitHub doesn't provide charts or a dashboard to get into the details of the costs, for example for historical data. This can be a problem if you have multiple projects, as it’s not obvious which service causes the costs. If you want to figure that out, you can get a CSV from GitHub, which is hard to read and analyze. We, therefore, decided to create a dashboard to visualize this CSV and show you the costs per repository and month.

Reviewer: I think that can be shorter, but you can tackle this in a second PR 🙌

Reviewer 2: I removed it
